indradyumna: pāṇḍyakhaṇḍādhirāja-
stvadbhaktātmā candanādrau kadācit |
tvat sevāyāṃ magnadhīrāluloke
naivāgastyaṃ prāptamātithyakāmam ||1||
indradyumna:	Indradyumna
pāṇḍya-khaṇḍa-adhirāja:-	of Paandya land, the king
tvat-bhakta-ātmā	Thy great devotee
candana-ādrau	on the Malayaa mountain
kadācit	once upon a time
tvat sevāyāṃ magna-dhī:	in Thy worship, entirely absorbed
āluloke na-eva-	did not even notice
agastyaṃ prāptam-	sage Agastya approaching
ātithyakāmam	(who was) expecting hospitality
Indradyumna, Thy great devotee and the king of Paandya land was once engrossed in worshipping Thee on the Malaya mountain. He was so absorbed that he did not even notice sage Agastya who approached expecting his hospitality.
kumbhodbhūti: saṃbhṛtakrodhabhāra:
stabdhātmā tvaṃ hastibhūyaṃ bhajeti |
śaptvā'thainaṃ pratyagāt so'pi lebhe
hastīndratvaṃ tvatsmṛtivyaktidhanyam ||2||
kumbhodbhūti:	Agastya
saṃbhṛta-krodha-bhāra:	(who was) overcome with anger (said)
stabdha-ātmā tvaṃ	you of such haughty nature
hastibhūyaṃ bhaja-iti	be born as a elephant, thus
śaptvā-atha-enaṃ	then cursing him
pratyagāt	departed
s:-api lebhe	he also got
hasti-indratvaṃ	the form of a lordly elephant
tvat-smṛti-vyakti-dhanyam	with the good fortune of retaining a clear memory of Thee
Agastya who was overcome with anger cursed the king that as he was of such haughty nature he would be born as an elephant and departed. Indradyumna got the form of a lordly elephant with the good fortune of retaining a clear memory of Thee.
dagdhāmbhodhermadhyabhāji trikūṭe
krīḍañchaile yūthapo'yaṃ vaśābhi: |
sarvān jantūnatyavartiṣṭa śaktyā
tvadbhaktānāṃ kutra notkarṣalābha: ||3||
dugdha-ambhodhe:-madhya-bhāji	of the milk ocean's middle part
trikūṭe krīḍan-śaile	on the Trikoota mountain sporting
yūthapa:-ayaṃ vaśābhi:	this leader of the elephants, with females (elephants)
sarvān jantūn-atyavartiṣṭa	all creatures excelling
śaktyā	in strength
tvat-bhaktānāṃ	Thy devotees
kutra na-	where not
utkarṣa-lābha:	(do they) inherit greatness?
On the Trikoota mountain, which is in the centre of the milk ocean, this leader of the elephants sported with female elephants excelling all other creatures in strength. Where don’t Thy devotees attain superiority?
svena sthemnā divyadeśatvaśaktyā
so'yaṃ khedānaprajānan kadācit |
śailaprānte gharmatānta: sarasyāṃ
yūthaissārdhaṃ tvatpraṇunno'bhireme ||4||
svena sthemnā	of his own strength
divya-deśatva-śaktyā	(and) by the power of that divine region
sa:-ayaṃ	he this (elephant king)
khedān-aprajānan	any difficulties of life not knowing
kadācit	one day
śaila-prānte	in the slopes of the hills (roaming about)
gharma-tānta:	overwhelmed by sun's heat
sarasyāṃ yūthai:-sārdham	in a lake with his herds
tvat-praṇunna:-	prompted by Thee
abhireme	sported
Owing to his strength and by the power of the divine region, where he lived, the elephant king did not face any hardships of life. One day, roaming on the mountainous region, unable to bear the heat of the sun, he sought relief in a lake and sported therein with his herds, indeed prompted by Thee.
hūhūstāvaddevalasyāpi śāpāt
grāhībhūtastajjale bartamāna: |
jagrāhainaṃ hastinaṃ pādadeśe
śāntyarthaṃ hi śrāntido'si svakānām ||5||
hūhū:-tāvat-	then Huhu (the Gandarva)
devalasya-api śāpāt	by sage Devala's curse, also
grāhībhūta:-	a crocodile having become
tat-jale vartamāna:	in the waters of the same ( lake) living
jagrāha-enaṃ hastinam	(he) caught this elephant
pād-deśe	by the leg
śānti-arthaṃ hi	for the welfare indeed
śrāntida:-asi	sufferings giver are Thou
svakānām	to Thy devotees
At that time, in the waters of that lake, there lived a Gandarva named Huhu, who had become a crocodile because of the curse of sage Devala. He caught the elephant king by the leg. Indeed Thou do give sufferings to Thy devotees for their ultimate welfare.
tvatsevāyā vaibhavāt durnirodhaṃ
yudhyantaṃ taṃ vatsarāṇāṃ sahasram |
prāpte kāle tvatpadaikāgryasidhyai
nakrākrāntaṃ hastivaryaṃ vyadhāstvam ||6||
tvat-sevāyā: vaibhavāt	by Thy worship's glory
durnirodhaṃ yudhyantaṃ taṃ	continuously fighting him (who was)
vatsarāṇāṃ sahasram	for a thousand years
prāpte kāle	when the time had come (for his redemption)
tvat-pada-ekāgrya-sidhyai	to Thy feet for attaining one-pointed devotion
nakra-ākrāntaṃ hastivaryaṃ	who was attacked by the crocodile, that elephant king
vyadhā:-tvam	made it happen (thus) Thou
Supported by the power derived from the glory of Thy worship, the elephant king was invincible and went on fighting for a thousand years. When the time for his redemption had come, and he was fit for one-pointed devotion to Thee, Thou subjected him to this situation.
ārtivyaktaprāktanajñānabhakti:
śuṇḍotkṣiptai: puṇḍarīkai: samarcan |
pūrvābhyastaṃ nirviśeṣātmaniṣṭhaṃ
stotraṃ śreṣṭhaṃ so'nvagādīt parātman ||7||
ārti-vyakta-	under the stress of suffering, unfolded
prāktana-jñāna-bhakti:	the knowledge and devotion which he attained in previous life
śuṇḍa-utkṣiptai:	plucked with his trunk
puṇḍarīkai: samarcan	with white lotus flowers he worshipped Thee
pūrva-abhyastaṃ	and learnt before (in the past life)
nirviśeṣa-ātma-niṣṭhaṃ	pertaining to the attributeless Aatman
stotraṃ śreṣṭhaṃ	a great hymn
sa:-anvagādīt	he sang and sang
parātman	O Supreme being!
Under the stress of suffering, his inherent devotion and pure knowledge unfolded and he began to offer Thee worship with white lotus flowers plucked with his trunk. Relating to the attributeless Brahman, he sang continuously a great hymn which he had learnt in the past life.
śrutvā stotraṃ nirguṇasthaṃ samastaṃ
brahmeśādyairnāhamityaprayāte |
sarvātmā tvaṃ bhūrikāruṇyavegāt
tārkṣyārūḍha: prekṣito'bhū: purastāt ||8||
śrutvā stotraṃ	hearing the hymn
nirguṇasthaṃ samastaṃ	to the attributeless Aatman relating fully
brahma-īśa-ādyai:	by Brahmaa Shiva and others (deciding)
na-aham-iti-aprayāte	(this) is not for me, and so not responding
sarva-ātmā tvaṃ	who are the soul of all beings, Thou
bhūri-kāruṇya-vegāt	out of infinite compassion
tārkṣya-ārūḍha:	mounting Garuda
prekṣita:-abhū: purastāt	appeared in front of him
On hearing the hymn, Brahmaa, Shiva and other gods did not proceed towards the elephant king, as they felt that the hymn was not addressed to them. The Soul of All Beings! Thou moved by boundless flow of mercy, mounted the Garuda and appeared in front of him.
hastīndraṃ taṃ hastapadmena dhṛtvā
cakreṇa tvaṃ nakravaryaṃ vyadārī: |
gandharve'smin muktaśāpe sa hastī
tvatsārūpyaṃ prāpya dedīpyate sma ||9||
hastī-indraṃ taṃ	that elephant king
hasta-padmena dhṛtvā	with Thy lotus hands catching hold of
cakreṇa tvaṃ nakravaryaṃ vyadārī:	with the discus,Thou, the great crocodile, tore asunder
gandharve-asmin mukta-śāpe	(when) the Gandarva was released from the curse
sa hastī	that elephant king
tvat-sārūpyaṃ prāpya	a form similar to Thine, attaining
dedīpyate sma	shone brightly
Thou with Thy lotus hands caught hold of that elephant king and cut asunder the powerful crocodile with Thy discus. The crocodile was thus released from the curse of sage Devala and got back his Gandharva form. The elephant was, by Thee, then endowed with a brilliant form similar to Thy from.
etadvṛttaṃ tvāṃ ca māṃ ca prage yo
gāyetso'yaṃ bhūyase śreyase syāt |
ityuktvainaṃ tena sārdhaṃ gatastvaṃ
dhiṣṇyaṃ viṣṇo pāhi vātālayeśa ||10||
etat-vṛttaṃ	this incident
tvāṃ ca māṃ ca	to you and to me
prage ya: gāyet	at dawn, he who sings
sa:-ayaṃ bhūyase śreyase syāt	he will attain the greatest good -i.e., liberation
iti-uktvā-enaṃ	saying thus to him
tena sārdhaṃ gata:-tvaṃ dhiṣṇyaṃ	with him Thou went away to Vaikuntha
viṣṇo pāhi	O Vishnu! Protect me
vātālayeśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
"He who praises you and Me with the recital of these incidents will attain liberation". O Vishnu, Thou said thus to him and then along with him departed to Thy abode Vaikuntha. O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou be pleased to protect me.